## Constructs

Constructs allow you to create new _keywords, clauses, and behaviours_ based on a few simple rules of syntax. There are two different constructs already built and supplied with SAI, and by examining them, we can see how they work, how you can use them yourself, and how you might create your own.

(Okay actually, there are a lot more constructs supporting the more basic features of the language, but these two are kind of unusual in terms of what they do and support, so we'll pretend they're special.)


### STATE

    state [value1] (given [parameter list])
      ... code ...
      goto [value] (, [parameters for next state])
      ... code ...
    state [value2] (given [parameter list])
      goto etc...
    ... repeats for as many states as supplied

The __state__ construct creates an asynchronous state machine (or finite automata) that can be used for many different kinds of processes, from making requests or managing other machines, to controlling and responding to near-realtime events. 

Each declared __state__ is given a name (the value), and has an associated block of code. Each block is a function, with optional parameters. These functions are invoked with the __goto__ verb. The first parameter of __goto__ is the name of the state; any additional parameters are passed in to the state function. 

The uppermost defined __state__ in the construct is the starting state by convention, and it is invoked first. When you __goto__ a new state, you'll just be scheduling the next state to occur next. You must `return` if you want its execution to stop immediately. If you do not __goto__ another state, the machine ends (unless a callback into to a state happens asynchronously). State machine context is preserved until there is no more opportunity for a callback.

*Note*: The __state__ construct runs asynchronously. Synchronous code execution passes the state machine definition instantly, and the first state executes on the next event loop tick via node's `setImmediate`. Each time you __goto__ a new state, that state is also scheduled asynchronously. While the event loop is quite fast (perhaps 100k state transitions per second on a laptop), you will want to avoid using the __state__ construct for applications that require high performance and/or that do not benefit greatly from asynchronous response. In these cases, a `while` loop around a `switch` statement is a good place to start.

Context is preserved with the state machine, including the _current_ (this) object. You have access to all member variables/methods of the object instance that invoked the __state__ construct. Variables you `set` within any state are available to all states. However, `local` variables are restricted to the state they're defined in. (Examine the generated Javascript code for clarity.) 

Here is a simple example of a state machine, a Turing machine that adds two unary (bitcount) numbers starting at the read head, extending right and separated by a single 0 digit.

    set Readout to task  // display Turing tape and current head position
      debug tape into '' sum + ((key is head) ?? '[${it}]' :: ' ${it} ')

    state 'start' // turing machine to add two numbers, in this case 3 & 4.
      set tape list 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0
      set head 1
      goto 'a'

    state 'a' 
      Readout
      if tape\head       // seek end of first number
        set tape\head 1
        inc head
        goto 'a'
      else               // set bit between numbers
        set tape\head 1
        inc head
        goto 'b'

    state 'b'
      Readout
      if tape\head       // seek end of second number
        set tape\head 1
        inc head
        goto 'b'
      else
        set tape\head 0  // rewind to end of second number
        dec head
        goto 'c'
  
    state 'c'
      Readout
      if tape\head       // clear bit at end of second number
        set tape\head 0
        dec head
        goto 'd'
      else
        debug "Should not be able to get here."
        goto 'halt'
      
    state 'd'
      Readout
      if tape\head       // seek back to the beginning of the result
        set tape\head 1
        dec head
        goto 'd'
      else
        set tape\head 0  // return to first set bit and halt
        inc head
        goto 'halt'

    state 'halt'
      Readout
      debug "Run complete."

    debug "State machine started." // appears first because STATE is asynchronous

The output is: 

    State machine started.
     0 [1] 1  1  0  1  1  1  1  0 
     0  1 [1] 1  0  1  1  1  1  0 
     0  1  1 [1] 0  1  1  1  1  0 
     0  1  1  1 [0] 1  1  1  1  0 
     0  1  1  1  1 [1] 1  1  1  0 
     0  1  1  1  1  1 [1] 1  1  0 
     0  1  1  1  1  1  1 [1] 1  0 
     0  1  1  1  1  1  1  1 [1] 0 
     0  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1 [0]
     0  1  1  1  1  1  1  1 [1] 0 
     0  1  1  1  1  1  1 [1] 0  0 
     0  1  1  1  1  1 [1] 1  0  0 
     0  1  1  1  1 [1] 1  1  0  0 
     0  1  1  1 [1] 1  1  1  0  0 
     0  1  1 [1] 1  1  1  1  0  0 
     0  1 [1] 1  1  1  1  1  0  0 
     0 [1] 1  1  1  1  1  1  0  0 
    [0] 1  1  1  1  1  1  1  0  0 
     0 [1] 1  1  1  1  1  1  0  0 
    Run complete.

There are many easier ways of programming a Turing machine without hardcoding everything like this. This one does show off the __state__ construct fairly nicely, however.

#### goto 

#### then


### PROMISING

The __promising__ construct is more complex, with a number of different clauses. It can be used to lend a bit of clarity to asynchronous operations using `promise`-based functions. (Note that __finally__ is only supported if your environment supports it, as of this writing node.js does not.)

    promising [active promise]
      resolve/reject [parameters]
     - or -
    promising
      [code that is turned into a promise]
      resolve/reject (parameters)

    ... followed by one or more of ...

    then [active promise]
     - or -
    then (promise parameters)
      [code that is turned into a promise]
      resolve/reject (parameters)

    catch [active promise]
     - or -
    catch (promise parameters)
      [code that is turned into a promise]
      resolve/reject (parameters)

    finally [active promise]
     - or -
    finally (promise parameters)
      [code that is turned into a promise]
      resolve/reject (parameters)

    any [array of active promises]
    
    all [array of active promises]

    rejecting (expression)
    
    resolving (expression)
    
    finalizing 
    

In one sense __promising__ is just a bit of syntactical sugar for using `chain` to connect `then` and `catch` etc in a series of chained method calls. And indeed, that's what it does behind the scenes. But simplifying syntax is not a bad thing, especially if it eases working with a more hat can be quite confusing. And Promises are certainly that.

In order to make this construct work, you need to know what each clause requires, not only syntactically, but from a code point of view.  We'll take each clause one by one. 

Most clauses in __promising__ are either a single line with a verb (with optional parameters) that returns a Promise (a.k.a a _thenable_), or multi-line, accepting a block of code that it will wrap in a Promise, as if it were the body of a function.

First things first: the __promising__ clause must be the first clause in the construct, and you can only use it once. (You can start with either form of the __promising__ clause.) You can mix and match the other clauses in any order once you've started the __promising__.  

The final clause in the construct must be either __catch__ or __finally__ to ensure that errors are properly caught. However, you can use either of these multiple times in the same construct, in order to control execution flow between error handlers and the normal flow of code.

#### promising 

    promising [verb expression returning an active Promise]
     - or -
    promising 
      [code block that will be wrapped as a Promise]

__Promising__ starts the clause. It expects an active Promise -- an object with `.then` and `.catch` ready for use. 

In single line form, use it with a verb expression -- the same syntax you'd use on a bare line to invoke a function. (You do not use `from` or `!` to invoke the verb, that happens automatically.) 

    promising db.listDatabases

In this form, the function you are promising must have been declared as a __promise__, or been created in or wrapped in a _Promise_ wrapper by a library or helper.  

If you need to use asynchronous functions that use callbacks or other methodologies, ideally you'd wrap them for easier use, but 
    
In multi-line form, you're crafting the body of a __promise__ function, and you'll use __reject__ and __resolve__ to pass along asynchronous results to the next clause of the construct.

    promising
      https.get url, task
        set body ''
        $setEncoding 'utf8'
        $on 'data', task
          set body + $
        $on 'end', task
          resolve body
        $on 'error', task
          reject $

Of course you could just take that bunch of code and wrap it in a __promise__ yourself, perhaps as part of some global object. But more likely you'd just find a package on npm that offers promisified fetchers ai Because you're smart.

#### then 

    then [verb expression returning an active Promise]
     - or -
    then (optional [GIVEN parameter list])
      [code block that will be wrapped as a Promise]

The __then__ clause continues the chain of asynchronous execution. Whatever you __resolve__ in the previous clause is given to the next __then__ clause as one (or more) parameters. (You can use the pronoun __$__ to refer to the first parameter passed without giving it a name.)

    then db.dropDatabase dbName
    
Which, by the way, does the exact same thing as this:

    then
      resolve from db.dropDatabase dbName
      
Notice how the second form uses `from` to invoke the function before resolving the value, while the first form just assumes you'll be wanting to execute a function so makes the invokation syntax implicit.

The block takes the same form and acts the same way as the one in __promising__.

Here's a fun note: when coding these _block form_ clauses, there is an automatic __resolve__ applied at the end of the code block, so execution carries onwards without you having to be explicit about it. So you can  do this:

    promising
      debug "First this"
    then
      debug "Then this"
      reject "Ninja!"
    then
      debug "But not this."
    catch
      debug $
    
Which prints:

    First this
    Then this
    Ninja!

Notice how `Ninja!` is transferred by passing the message to the __catch__ clause via __reject__.  And also note the __$__ pronoun. The __catch__ clause could have been written either of these ways too.

    catch given msg
      debug msg
      
    catch debug $

#### catch 

    catch [verb expression returning an active Promise]
     - or -
    catch (optional [GIVEN parameter list])
      [code block that will be wrapped as a Promise]

As you'd expect __catch__ works just like the other line or block form clauses, except that it is only executed if a previous clause __rejects__ something. As illustrated in the above text!

If there is a __then__ or __finally__ clause after __catch__ in the construct, it will be executed, unless you __reject__ again.

#### finally 

    finally [verb expression returning an active Promise]
     - or -
    finally (optional [GIVEN parameter list])
      [code block that will be wrapped as a Promise]

This clause captures both main and error code paths in the Promise pseudo-thread, thus it is always executed regardless of whether the previous clause ended with a __reject__ or __resolve__.

Support for __finally__ is dependent on whether the Promises library you are using supports it; SAI does not shim it for you. As of this writing, `Promise.finally` has not been ratified for inclusion in ES6, and node.js does not support it.

#### all 

    all [expression yielding an array of promises]
     - or -
    all 

The __all__ clause, along with __any__ is different than the other clauses. __All__ is a simple way of waiting for an array of promises to _all_ be resolved. It takes a single parameter -- an array -- and waits for each Promise in the array to be resolved. It uses the `Promise.all` helper to do this.

The stand-alone version of all, that takes no expression, assumes the array has been sent to it from the __resolve__ in the previous clause. The following two lines are identical:

    all       // all (implicit)
    all $     // all (explicit)
    
The __all__ clause is great to use when you need to fetch multiple resources all at once and need to know when they're done. The following two line snippet fetches a list of databases (asynchronously) and then passes the resulting list __thru__ a function that creates multiple requests for more information about each database. The result is an array of promises that are used as a parameter to __all__.

    promising db.listDatabases
    all $ thru db.get(it, '/')

__All__ resolves either with a list of the __resolve__ values of every promise in the array, or a _single_ value that is the _first_ rejection of any of those promises.  In other words, __all__ will wait to __resolve__ until all of it's work done, but the instant something breaks, it __rejects__ everything and gives up.

#### any

    any [expression yielding an array of promises]
     - or -
    any
    
The __any__ clause is very similar to __all__, except that it either __rejects__ or __resolves__ based on the first event in all of the promises in its array. So while __all__ will wait to resolve for everything to be finished, __any__ will resolve when the first Promise it is monitoring does so. Like __all__, however, it __rejects__ on the first Promise to do so.

#### rejecting 

    rejecting [expression]
     - or -
    rejecting

So you might be wondering how do you pass the results of a __promising__ construct to a Promise that contains it. After all, you cannot __resolve__ or __reject__ an outer promise from an inner one -- the rules of scoping forbid it. In this case, the last three clauses help you out.

__Rejecting__ is internally equivalent to a __catch__ clause, in that any error conditions are caught by it. However, it then marks the Promise _containing_  the __promising__ construct as rejected. 

The bare word version of __rejecting__ sends the error value it received to the containing Promise, while the version with an expression allows you to customise it.

#### resolving

    resolving [expression]
     - or -
    resolving

Similarlly, __resolving__ will resolve a containing Promise with either an expression or a passed-on value.
    
#### finalizing

    finalizing [expression]
     - or -
    finalizing
    
And, most useful, the __finalizing__ clause will take the current state of the __promising__ clause it is a part of and transfer it to the containing promise, kind of like a `return` statement. 


### How Constructs Work

SAI code is organized into discrete lines of indented text. Level of indent implies _ownership_. Less indented lines are _parents_ of more indented code that follows. To illustrate:

    line a       // parent b, c and e
      line b     //   child of a, not a parent
      line c     //   parent of d, child of a
        line d   //     child of d
      line e     //   parent of f, child of a
        line f   //     child of e
    line g       // parent of h
      line h     //   child of h

You can think of SAI's parser as operating in this way -- it traverses code, evaluating all of the child lines first, resolving them into code, then passing that code to the parents, where it is in turn resolved into larger and larger functional blocks of code. 

_Constructs_ are a flexible and customizable entry point into this process. By design, each line of SAI code starts with a _verb_, that is, a direction to take a definite action. Often the verb is the name of a function or object method, in which case the verb resolves to a simple invokation. Other verbs are native verbs, such as __set__, __return__, __break__, __if__, __while__, and __throw__ that control program flow or assign values. 

The final category of verbs are the _constructs_. These are meta-programming tools that combine simple, low-level language features into more convenient and easier to understand forms. 

Idealogically the difference between a "native" verb and a "construct," is that you can always build the functionality of any construct by using native verbs (perhaps in some horribly complicated way), but you cannot use constructs to reproduce the function of native verbs.  

For example, the functionality offered by __while__ is arguably impossible to reproduce without using some other native looping construct.  Whereas the __ply__ construct can absolutely be written as a `while` loop; it's just uglier that way. And here in SAI land we are all about eliminating ugliness as much as possible.

Enter _constructs_.


